                                                           Towards Verifying Nonlinear Integer Arithmetic
                                                                     Paul Beame∗                               Vincent Liew∗
                                                          Computer Science and Engineering             Computer Science and Engineering
                                                             University of Washington                     University of Washington
                                                             beame@cs.washington.edu                      vliew@cs.washington.edu
arXiv:1705.04302v2 [cs.LO] 7 Aug 2018




                                                                                         March 21, 2022



                                                                                             Abstract
                                                      We eliminate a key roadblock to efficient verification of nonlinear integer arithmetic using
                                                  CDCL SAT solvers, by showing how to construct short resolution proofs for many properties
                                                  of the most widely used multiplier circuits. Such short proofs were conjectured not to exist.
                                                  More precisely, we give nO(1) size regular resolution proofs for arbitrary degree 2 identities on
                                                  array, diagonal, and Booth multipliers and nO(log n) size proofs for these identities on Wallace
                                                  tree multipliers.


                                        1        Introduction
                                        The last few decades have seen remarkable advances in our ability to verify hardware and software.
                                        Methods for hardware verification based on Ordered Binary Decision Diagrams (OBDDs) developed
                                        in the 1980s for hardware equivalence testing [15] were extended in the 1990s to produce general
                                        methods for symbolic model checking [17] to verify complex correctness properties of designs. More
                                        recently, several orders of magnitude of improvements in the efficiency of SAT solvers have brought
                                        new vistas of verification of hardware and software within reach.
                                             Nonetheless, there is an important area of formal verification where roadblocks that were iden-
                                        tified in the 1980s still remain: verification of data paths within designs for Arithmetic Logic Units
                                        (ALUs), or indeed any verification problem in hardware or software that involves the detailed prop-
                                        erties of nonlinear arithmetic. Natural examples of such verification problems in software include
                                        computations involving hashing or cryptographic constructions. At the highest level of abstraction,
                                        nonlinear arithmetic over the integers is undecidable, but the focus of these verification problems
                                        is on the decidable case of integers of bounded size, which is naturally described in the language of
                                        bit-vector arithmetic (see, e.g. [31, 29]).
                                             In particular, a notorious open problem is that of verifying properties of integer multipliers in
                                        a way that both is general purpose and avoids exponential scaling in the bit-width. Bryant [16]
                                        showed that this is impossible using OBDDs since they require exponential size in the bit-width just
                                        to represent the middle bit of the output of a multiplier. This lower bound has been improved [9]
                                        and extended to include very tight exponential lower bounds for much more general diagrams than
                                        OBDDs, including FBDDs [36, 10] and general bounded-length branching programs [40]. With the
                                            ∗
                                                Research supported in part by NSF grant CCF-1524246.


                                                                                                 1
flexibility of CNF formulas, efficient representation of multipliers is no longer a problem but, even
with the advent of greatly improved SAT solvers, there has been no advance in verifying multipliers
beyond exponential scaling.
    One important technique for verifying software and hardware that includes multiplication has
been to use methods of uninterpreted functions to handle multipliers (see [13, 31]) – essentially
converting them to black boxes and hoping that there is no need to look inside to check the details.
Another important technique has been to observe that it is often the case that one input to a multi-
plier is a known constant and hence the resulting computation involves linear, rather than nonlinear
arithmetic. These approaches have been combined with theories of arithmetic (e.g. [11, 35, 14, 12]),
including preprocessors that do some form of rewriting to eliminate nonlinear arithmetic, but these
methods are not able, for example, to check the details of a multiplier implementation or handle
nonlinearity.
    Though the above approaches work in some contexts, they are very limited. The approach
of verifying code with multiplication using uninterpreted functions is particularly problematic for
hashing and cryptographic applications. For example, using uninterpreted functions in the actual
hash function computation inherently can never consider the case that there is a hash collision, since
it only can infer equality between terms with identical arguments. Concern about the correctness
of the arithmetic in such applications is real: for example, longstanding errors in multiplication in
OpenSSL have recently come to light [34].
    Recent presentations at verification conferences and workshops have highlighted the problem of
verifying nonlinear arithmetic, and multipliers in particular, as one of the key gaps in our current
verification methods [5, 6, 28, 8].
    Since bit-vector arithmetic is not itself a representation in Boolean variables, in order to apply
SAT solvers to verify the designs, one must convert implementations and specifications to CNF
formulas based on specified bit-widths. The process by which one does this is called flattening [31],
or more commonly bit-blasting. The resulting CNF formulas are then sent to the SAT solvers.
While the resulting bit-blasted CNF formulas for a multiplier may grow quadratically with the
bit-width, this growth is not a significant problem. On the other hand, a major stumbling block
for handling even modest bit-widths is the fact that existing SAT solvers run on these formulas
experience exponential blow-up as the bit-width increases. This is true even for the best of recent
methods, e.g., Boolector [12], MathSAT [14], STP [26], Z3 [24], and Yices [23].
    In verifying a multiplier circuit one could try to compare it to a reference circuit that is known to
be correct. This introduces a chicken-and-egg problem: how do we know that the reference circuit
is correct? Another approach to verifying a multiplier circuit is to check that it satisfies the right
properties. A correct multiplier circuit must obey the multiplication identities for a commutative
ring. If we check that each of these ring identities holds then the multiplier cannot have an error.
This approach has the advantage that the specification of a multiplier circuit can be written a
priori in terms of its natural properties, rather than in terms of an external reference circuit.
    Empirically, however, modern SAT-solvers perform badly using either approach to problems of
multiplier verification. Biere, in the text accompanying benchmarks on the ring identities submitted
to the 2016 SAT Competition [7] writes that when given as CNF formulas, no known technique is
capable of handling bit-width larger than 16 for commutativity or associativity of multiplication
or bit-width 12 for distributivity of multiplication over addition. These observations lead to the
question: is the difficulty inherent in these verification problems, or are modern SAT-solvers just
using the wrong tools for the job?


                                                   2
    Modern SAT-solvers are based on a paradigm called conflict-directed clause-learning
(CDCL) [33] which can be seen as a way of breaking out of the backtracking search of tradi-
tional DPLL solvers [21]. When these solvers confirm the validity of an identity (by not finding a
counterexample), their traces yield resolution proofs [4] of that identity. The size of such a proof is
comparable to the running time of the solver; hence finding short resolution proofs of these identi-
ties is a necessary prerequisite for efficient verification via CDCL solvers. Although it is not known
whether CDCL solvers are capable of efficiently simulating every resolution proof, all cases where
short resolution proofs are known have also been shown to have short CDCL-style traces (e.g.,
[19, 18, 20]).
    The extreme lack of success of general purpose solvers (in particular CDCL solvers) for verifying
any non-trivial properties of bit-vector multiplication, recently led Biere to conjecture [8] that there
is a fundamental proof-theoretic obstacle to succeeding on such problems; namely, verifying ring
identities for multiplication circuits, such as commutativity, requires resolution proofs that are
exponential in the bit-width n.
    We show that such a roadblock to efficient verification of nonlinear arithmetic does not exist by
giving a general method for finding short resolution proofs for verifying any degree 2 identity for
Boolean circuits consisting of bit-vector adders and multipliers. This method is based on reducing
the multiplier verification to finding a resolution refutation of one of a number of narrow critical
strips. We apply this method to a number of the most widely used multiplier circuits, yielding
nO(1) size proofs for array, diagonal, and Booth multipliers, and nO(log n) size proofs for Wallace
tree multipliers.
    These resolution proofs are of a special simple form: they are regular resolution proofs1 . Regular
resolution proofs have been identified in theoretical models of CDCL solvers as one of the simplest
kinds of proof that CDCL solvers naturally express [19]. Indeed, experience to date has been that
the addition of some heuristics to CDCL suffices to find short regular resolution proofs that we
know exist. The new regular resolution proofs that we produce are a key step towards developing
such heuristics for verifying general nonlinear arithmetic.

Related work SAT solver-based techniques used in conjunction with case splitting previously
were shown to achieve some success for multiplier verification in the work of Andrade et al. [3]
improving on earlier work [2, 37] which combined SAT solver and OBDD-based ideas for multiplier
verification among other applications; however, there was no general understanding of when such
methods will succeed.
    Recently, two alternative approaches to multiplier verification have been considered: Ko-
jevnikov [27] designed a mixed Boolean-algebraic solver, BASolver, that takes input CNF formulas
in standard format. It uses algebraic rules on top of a DPLL solver. Though it can verify the equiv-
alence of multipliers up to 32 bits in a reasonable time, in each instance it requires human input
in order to find a suitable set of algebraic rules to help the solver. An alternative approach using
Groebner basis algorithms has been considered [41]. This is a purely algebraic approach based on
polynomials. Since the language of polynomials allows one to explicitly write down the algebraic
specification for an n-bit multiplier, the verification problem is conveniently that of checking that
   1
    Some of these proofs are even more restricted ordered resolution proofs, also known as DP proofs, which are asso-
ciated with the original Davis-Putnam procedure [22]. In contrast to the Davis-Putnam procedure, which eliminates
variables one-by-one keeping all possible resolvents, ordered resolution (or DP) proofs only keep some minimal subset
of these resolvents needed to derive a contradiction.



                                                         3
the multiplier circuit computes a polynomial equivalent to the multiplier specification. [41] shows
that Groebner basis algorithms can be used to verify 64-bit multipliers in less than ten minutes
and 128-bit multipliers in less than two hours. One drawback of algebraic methods is they require
that the multipliers be identified and treated entirely separately from the rest of the circuit or
software. Unfortunately, for the non-algebraic parts of circuits, Groebner basis methods can only
handle problems several orders of magnitude smaller than can be handled by CDCL SAT-solvers
and it remains to be seen whether it is possible to combine these to obtain effective verification for
a general purpose software with nonlinear arithmetic or circuits that contain a multiplier as just
one component of their design. In contrast, CDCL SAT solvers are already very effective for the
non-algebraic aspects of circuits and are well-suited to handling the combination of different com-
ponents; our work shows that there is no inherent limitation preventing them from being effective
for verification of general purpose nonlinear arithmetic.
    Finally, independently of and in parallel with our results, there has also been further work on
refining Groebner basis methods [38]. We postpone discussing that refinement until after we have
presented our results.

Roadmap: Section 3 gives our polynomial size regular resolution proofs for array multipliers. Sec-
tion 4 describes how to extend these ideas to obtain short proofs for diagonal and Booth multipliers.
Section 5 gives our quasipolynomial size regular resolution proofs for Wallace tree multipliers.


2     Notation and Preliminaries
We represent Boolean variables in lowercase and denote clauses by uppercase letters and think
of them as sets of literals, for example C = {x, ȳ, z}. We will work with length n bit-vectors of
variables, denoted by z = zn−1 . . . z1 z0 . When applicable, we will label arithmetic circuits by their
output bitvector. For example, a multiplier with inputs x, y will be labeled xy.
    We consider identities from the commutative ring of integers Z. A variable assignment is denoted
by a set σ = σ(x0 , x1 . . . xn ) = {x0 = b0 , x1 = b1 . . . xn = bn }, where each bi ∈ {0, 1}. x0 , x1 , . . . xn .

Definition A commutative ring (R, ⊕, ⊗, 0, 1) consists of a nonempty set R with addition (⊕) and
multiplication (⊗) operators that satisfy the following properties:

    1. (R,⊕) is associative and commutative and its identity element is 0.

    2. For each x ∈ R there exists an additive inverse.

    3. (R,⊗) is associative and commutative and its identity element is 1 6= 0.

    4. (distributivity) For all x, y, z ∈ R, x ⊗ (y ⊕ z) = (x ⊗ y) ⊕ (x ⊗ z).

A ring identity L = R denotes a pair of expressions L, R that can be transformed into each other
using commutativity, distributivity and associativity.

    Note that both verifying integer ⊕ circuits and verifying that x ⊗ 1 = x are easy in practice,
so verifying an integer multiplier circuit ⊗ can be easily reduced to verifying its distributivity.

Definition A resolution proof consists of a sequence of clauses, each of which is either a clause of
the input formula φ, or follows from two prior clauses via the resolution rule which produces clause

                                                         4
C ∨ D from clauses C ∨ x and D ∨ x. We say that this inference resolves the clauses on x. The
proof is a refutation of φ if it ends with the empty clause ⊥. (With resolution we will use the terms
“proof” and “refutation” interchangeably, since resolution provides proofs of unsatisfiability.)

    We can naturally represent a resolution proof P as a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of fan-in
2, with ⊥ labelling the lone sink node. Tree resolution is the special subclass of resolution proofs
where the DAG is a directed tree. Another restricted form of resolution is regular resolution: A
resolution refutation is regular iff on any path in its DAG the inferences resolve on each variable at
most once. The shortest tree resolution proofs are always regular. An ordered resolution refutation
is a regular resolution refutation that has the further property that the order in which variables
are resolved on along each path is consistent with a single total order of all variables. This is a
very significant restriction and indeed the shortest tree resolution proofs do not necessarily have
this property.
    We will find it convenient to express our regular resolution proofs in the form of a branching
program that solves the conflict clause search problem.

Definition Suppose that φ is an unsatisfiable formula. Then every assignment σ to its variables
conflicts with some clause in φ. The conflict clause search problem is to map any assignment to
some corresponding conflicting clause.

Definition A branching program B on the Boolean variables X = {x0 , x1 , . . .} and output set
φ (typically a set of clauses in this paper) is a finite directed acyclic graph with a unique source
node and sink nodes at its leaves, each leaf labeled by an element from φ. Each non-sink node is
labeled by a variable from X and has two outgoing edges, one labeled 0 and the other labeled 1.
An assignment σ activates an edge labeled b ∈ {0, 1} outgoing from a node labeled by the variable
xi if σ contains the assignment xi = b. If σ activates a path from the source to a sink labeled
C ∈ φ, we say that the branching program B outputs C.
    A read-once branching program (also known as a Free Binary Decision Diagram, or FBDD) is
a branching program where each variable is read at most once on any path from source to leaf. An
Ordered Binary Decision Diagram (OBDD) is a special case of an FBDD in which the variables
read along any path are consistent with a single total order.

    The general case of the following proposition connecting regular resolution proofs and conflict
clause search is due to Krajicek [30]; the special case connecting ordered resolution and OBDDs for
the conflict clause search problem was first observed in [32]. We include its proof for completeness.

Proposition 2.1. Let φ be an unsatisfiable formula. A regular resolution refutation R for φ of size
s corresponds to a size s read-once branching program that solves the conflict clause search problem
for φ.
    Suppose that B is a read-once branching program of size s solving the conflict clause search
problem for φ. Then there is a regular resolution refutation for φ of size s.
    Furthermore, if R is an ordered resolution refutation then the resulting branching program is
an OBDD and if B is an OBDD then the resulting resolution refutation is an ordered resolution
refutation.




                                                  5
    Figure 1: A regular resolution refutation for φ and the corresponding branching program.




         Figure 2: Branching on c.                            Figure 3: Propagating to c = 1.


Proof. Suppose that R is a regular resolution refutation of size s for φ. Each clause C appearing
in R is a node of B. If two clauses C0 ∨ x, C1 ∨ x̄ in R resolve on a variable x to produce the clause
C, then in the branching program B we branch from the node C on the variable x to reach C0 ∨ x
on the x = 0 branch, and C1 ∨ x̄ on the x = 1 branch. The resulting branching program B solves
the conflict clause search problem for φ and has the same size as the refutation R. The fact that
no variable is branched on more than once on any path is immediate from the definition; the fact
that this results in an OBDD in the case of ordered resolution is also immediate.
    In the other direction, we obtain a regular refutation R from the specified read-once branching
program B. We will label each node v with the maximal clause Cv that is falsified by every
assignment reaching v. These clauses form the regular resolution refutation. If v is a leaf then
Cv is the conflicting clause from φ found by B. If B branches from node v on a variable x to
nodes v0 , v1 , then in R we resolve the clauses Cv0 , Cv1 on x to obtain Cv . Again, the number of
clauses in the refutation R is the same as the number of nodes in the branching program B. The
fact that the resolution is regular follows immediately from the fact that the branching program is
read-once; if the branching program is an OBDD then it is immediate that the resolution refutation
is ordered.

    In our proofs we represent each clause with the partial assignment it forbids. For example we
write the clause x ∨ ȳ as the partial assignment {x = 0, y = 1}. A branching program for conflict
clause search in φ consists of three types of action, shown in Figures 2, 3, 4. At a node labeled
by an assignment σ 63 z, we branch on the variable z by connecting a child node with assignment
σ ∪ {z = 0} using a 0-labeled edge, and another child node σ ∪ {z = 1}, connected by a 1-labeled
edge. In the case that one of these children has an assignment conflicting with a clause C ∈ φ,
we say that we propagated the assignment σ to the other child’s assignment. Lastly, for a set of
leaf nodes with assignments σ0 , σ1 , . . . we can merge their branches based on a common assignment
σ ⊆ ∩i σi by replacing these nodes with a single node labeled by σ.




                                                  6
                      Figure 4: Merging on the common assignment {b = 0}.




Figure 5: 4-bit ripple-carry adder adding x, y. Each box represents a full adder with incoming
arrows and outgoing arrows representing inputs and outputs.


3     Array Multipliers
3.1   Array Multiplier Construction
We describe our SAT instances as a set of constraints, where each constraint is a set of clauses.
Our circuits are built using adders that output, in binary, the sum of three input bits. An adder is
encoded as follows:
Definition Let a0 , a1 , a2 be inputs to an adder A. The outputs c, d of the adder A are encoded
by the constraints:
                              d = a0 ⊕ a1 ⊕ a2    c = M AJ(a0 , a1 , a2 )
We call c carry-bit and d the sum-bit. If an adder has two constant 0 inputs it acts as a wire. If it
has precisely one constant input 0, we call it a half adder. If no inputs are constant, we call it a
full adder.
    Each circuit variable has a weight of the form 2i . Each adder will take in three bits of the same
weight 2i and output a sum-bit of weight 2i and a carry-bit of weight 2i+1 . The adder’s definition
ensures that the weighted sum of its input bits is the same as the weighted sum of its output bits.
In the constructions that follow, we divide the adders up into columns so that the i-th column
contains all the adders with inputs of weight 2i .

Ripple-Carry Adder: A ripple-carry adder, shown in Figure 5, takes in two bitvectors x, y and
outputs their sum in binary. In the i-th column, for i ≤ n, we place an adder Ai that takes the
three variables ci−1 , xi , yi and outputs the adder’s carry variable and sum variable to ci and oi
respectively. In the (n + 1)-st column we place a wire An+1 taking cn as input and outputting to
on+1 . While the implementation is simple, it has depth n.
    All the multipliers we describe perform two phases of computation to compute xy. The first
phase is the same in each multiplier: the circuit computes a tableau of values xi ∧ yj for each pair
of input bits xi and yj . These multipliers differ in the second phase, where the circuit computes
the weighted sum of the bits in the tableau.

                                                  7
        Figure 6: 3-bit array multiplier.                        Figure 7: 3-bit diagonal multiplier.


Array Multiplier: An n-bit array multiplier works by arranging n ripple-carry adders in order to
sum the n rows of the tableau. This multiplier has a simple grid-like architecture that is compact
and easy to lay out physically. It has depth linear in its bitwidth. In the first phase, an array
multiplier computes each tableau variable tij = xi ∧ yj , with associated weight 2i+j .
     Arrange a grid of full adders Ai,j , where i, j ∈ [0, n], as shown in Figure 6. Adder Ai,j occupies
the j-th row and the (i + j)-th column and outputs the carry and sum bits ci,j and di,j . For
i < 0, adder Ai,j takes inputs ti,j , di+i,j−1 , ci−1,j (replacing nonexistent variables with the constant
0). Adders of the form An,j take input cn,j−1 instead of cn−1,j . Finally, we add constraints
equating the sum-bits d0,0 , d0,1 , . . . , d0,n−1 , d1,n−1 , . . . , dn−1,n−1 with the corresponding output bits
o0 , o1 , . . . , o2n−1 .

3.2    Overview: Efficient Proofs for Degree Two Array Multiplier Identities
We give polynomial-size resolution proofs that commutativity, distributivity, and the identity x(x+
1) = x2 + x hold for a correctly implemented array multiplier. We go on to give polynomial-size
resolution proofs for general degree two identities.

Proof Overview: The main idea, common to our proofs for each circuit family including Wallace
tree multipliers, is to start by branching according to the lowest order disagreeing output bit between
the two circuits. In each of these branches, the subcircuit, which we call a critical strip, consists
of the constraints on a small number of columns behind the disagreeing bit. For a large enough
choice of width this critical strip is unsatisfiable since the removed section of the tableau on the
right does not have enough total weight to cause the disagreeing output bit. It then remains to
refute each critical strip.
    Our proofs inside each critical strip repeat three steps: (1) Branch on some of the input bits.
(2) Propagate those values as far in the circuit as possible. (3) Save the resulting assignment to
the boundary of the propagation. We call each of these boundaries a cut in the circuit.
    These cuts are sets of variables that, under any assignment, split the strip into a satisfiable
and an unsatisfiable region. If a cut assignment was propagated from an earlier portion of the
circuit, then this cut assignment is consistent with an assignment to this earlier subcircuit. But
since the critical strip as a whole is unsatisfiable, this cut assignment must be inconsistent with
any assignment to the rest of the circuit. Using these cuts, we reduce the unsatisfiable region in
the critical strip until it is trivially refuted.


                                                       8
    One can view our proof as showing that the constraints within each strip form a graph of path-
width O(log n) which, by [25], implies that there is a polynomial-size ordered resolution refutation
of the strip. In the case of commutativity, our argument implies that the constraint graphs for
the strips can be combined to yield a single constraint graph of pathwidth O(log n). For the other
identities, the orderings on the strips are different and the resulting constraint graphs only have
small branchwidth which, by [1], still implies that there are small regular resolution proofs of the
other identities. Rather than simply invoke these general arguments, we give the details of the
resolution proofs, along with more precise size bounds.

3.3   Proofs of Array Multiplier Commutativity
Definition We define a SAT instance φArray
                                         Comm (n). The inputs are length n bitvectors x, y. Using
the construction from Section 3.1, we define array multipliers Lxy and Ryx . The tableau variables
are defined by the constraints
                                    txy
                                     i,j = xi ∧ yj ,       tyx
                                                            i,j = yi ∧ xj ,

and in particular we can infer, through resolution, that txy     yx
                                                          i,j = tj,i .
                                      xy        yx
   After specifying the subcircuits L and R , we add a final subcircuit E, a set of inequality-
constraints encoding that the two circuits disagree on some output bit:
                                 ei = oxy     yx 
                                     
                                        i 6= oi    ∀i ∈ [0, 2n − 1],
                                           e0 ∨ e1 ∨ . . . e2n−1 .

    We give a small resolution proof for φArray
                                            Comm (n) in the form of a labeled OBDD B, as described
in Proposition 2.1. The variable order for B begins with e0 , e1 , . . ., followed by the output bits
oyx   yx                                                                xy    yx
 0 , o1 , . . .. Then B reads the variables associated with adders Ai,j , Aj,i in order of increasing j,
                                                                    xy xy
reading each row right to left. Finally, B reads the output bits o0 , o1 , . . ., then the input bits x, y
in an arbitrary order.
    At the root of B, we search for the first output bit on which Lxy and Ryx disagree by branching
on the sequences of bits ek = 1, ek−1 = 0, . . . e0 = 0 for each k ∈ [0, 2n]. We will show that on each
branch we can prove that φArray
                              Comm (n) is unsatisfiable using only the constraints from L
                                                                                              xy and Ryx

on the variables inside columns [k − log n, k].

Definition Let ∆ = log n. Let φStrip (k) hold the constraints from φArrayComm (n) containing any tableau
variable txy
          i,j or t yx
                   i,j for i+j ∈ [k −∆, k]. Then add unit clauses to φ Strip (k) to encode the assignment:
e0 = 0, e1 = 0, . . . , ek−1 = 0, ek = 1. We call φStrip (k) a critical strip of φArray
                                                                                  Comm (n). We call the
subset φStrip (k) ∩ L the critical strip of circuit L and likewise for circuit R.

Lemma 3.1. φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable for all k.
Proof. We interpret each critical strip as a circuit that outputs the weighted sum of the input
variables in circuits Lxy and Ryx . The assignment to e demands that the difference between the
critical strip outputs is precisely 2k . But by txy       yx
                                                   i,j = tj,i , the weighted sum of the tableau variables
is the same in both critical strips. The difference in the critical strip outputs is then bounded by
the larger of the sums of the input carry bits to column k − ∆ in the two strips. There are fewer
than n input carry bits for each critical strip, each of weight 2k−∆ = 2k /n, therefore the difference
in critical strip outputs is less than 2k , violating the assignment to e.

                                                       9
    Observe that this proof only relied on the relation txy    yx
                                                         ij = tji in the tableau variables. The
additional requirement that the tableau variables came from an assignment to x, y is unnecessary
to refute φStrip (k).

Lemma 3.2. There is an O(k 7 log k)-sized ordered resolution proof that φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable.

Proof. For simplicity we assume that k ≤ n; the case where k > n is similar. We will also preprocess
φStrip (k) by resolving on the variables in x, y to obtain the tableau variable relations tyx             xy
                                                                                                   j,i = ti,j ,
then replacing all the variables tyx        xy
                                    j,i by ti,j in the clauses φStrip (k). Viewing the proof as a branching
program, this amounts to querying x, y at the end. We will not resolve on x, y in the remainder of
this proof.
    We give this resolution proof in the form of a labeled read-once branching program B. We
define the input variables σinput as the set of tableau variables of circuit Lxy , together with the
carry variables from column k − ∆ − 1 of both Lxy and Ryx . We say σinput contains the input
variables to this critical strip, since their values determine an output assignment.
    The idea behind the branching program B is to verify circuit Lxy by branching on its input
variables row-by-row, going from top-to-bottom, remembering an assignment to a row of sum-
variables. Since txy       yx
                   i,j = tj,i , the tableau variables of circuit R
                                                                       yx simultaneously are revealed from
                                yx
bottom to top. In circuit R we maintain both a guess for its output values, and a row of sum-
variables. From the proof of Lemma 3.1, if we have found that the outputs of Lxy and Ryx were
computed correctly then they must violate one of the constraints ek = 0, . . . , ek−∆+1 = 0, ek−∆ = 1.

Definition Define Cut(0) as the set of variables containing

                                     dyx     yx
                                      0,i , oi−1      for i − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k].

For j ∈ [1, k − log k], we define Cut(j) to be the set containing the variables:

                              dxy       yx
                               i,j−1 , dj,i−1      for i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k],
                                      cyx
                                       j−1,i       for i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k − 1],
                                        oyx
                                          i        for i ∈ [k − ∆, k].

Lastly, for j ∈ [k − ∆, k], we define Cut(j) to be the set containing the variables, when the indices
are in-range:

                                                oxy
                                                 i     for i ∈ [k − ∆, j − 1],
                          dxy         yx yx
                           i+1,j−1 , dj,i , cj−1,i     for i + j ∈ [k − ∆, k],
                                            cyx
                                             j−1,i     for i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k − 1],
                                              oyx
                                                i      for i ∈ [k − ∆, k].

We will label each node of B by the pair (Cut(j), σ) where Cut(j) keeps track of the previously
seen cut.

Initialization: Throughout, we work in terms of the tableau variables in circuit Lxy , implicitly
substituting txy      yx
              ij for tji . We begin at the root node of the read-once branching program B, labeled
with an empty cut and an empty partial assignment (∅, ∅). For i ∈ [k − ∆, k] we branch on the


                                                          10
Figure 8: The critical strip φStrip (5) for checking commutativity. The enlarged variables belong
to Cut(2) of φStrip (5). This cut divides the critical strip into a shaded satisfiable region and an
unshaded unsatisfiable region.


variable oyx                      yx                                     yx     yx
          i , then propagate to d0,i using a clause from the constraint oi = d0,i . The surviving
                                                                        yx    yx
branches are those labeled by an assignment satisfying the constraints oi = d0,i . At this point we
have reached nodes labeled Cut(0).
    For each of the surviving branches, we branch on the tableau variables in the first row of xy:

                                         txy
                                          i,0      for i ∈ [k − ∆, k].

Then we propagate to the variables, in sequence,

                                    dyx     yx
                                     1,i , c0,i     for i + 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k]

from Cut(1) (notice that this does not include the input carry-bit cyx
                                                                    0,k−∆−1 ). We then merge on
Cut(1).

Inductive Step: We now describe the transition from Cut(j) to Cut(j + 1) for 1 ≤ j ≤ k.
Suppose that the branching program B has reached an assignment to Cut(j). From these nodes
we branch on the next, j-th row’s tableau variables

                                       txy
                                        i,j       for i + j ∈ [k − ∆, k]

and, when they exist, the pair of incoming input carry variables cL      R
                                                                  i,j , cj−1,i from column k −log k −1.
We then propagate to the Cut(j + 1) and cL variables in the sequence:

                              cxy     xy
                               i,j , di+1,j       for i + j + 1 ∈ [k − log k, k]


                                                         11
in circuit Lxy . If j ∈ [k − ∆, k] then we also propagate to oj−1 .

                              cyx     yx
                               j,i , dj+1,i   for i + j + 1 ∈ [k − log k, k]

in circuit Ryx . After branching on the last variable in Cut(j + 1) we start labeling nodes by
Cut(j + 1) and merge branches on their assignment to Cut(j + 1). This completes the step from
Cut(j) to Cut(j + 1).
    We repeat this step until we have reached Cut(k + 1). At this point we have an assignment to
the critical strip output bits oxy , oyx . Furthermore, both output assignments were the result of,
and therefore consistent with, propagating from a single assignment on the input variables σinputs .
By the proof of Lemma 3.1, this implies that our assignment to oxy , oyx conflicts with an inequality
constraint.

Size Bound: We show that there are O(k 6 log k) nodes in B. Each Cut(j) section of B begins
with an assignment to at most 4 log k variables, so there are at most k 4 nodes labeled by an
assignment to precisely Cut(j). We branch on up to log(k) + 2 input variables, so each cut has a
full binary tree of 8k nodes branching on different configurations of input variables. For each leaf
of this tree, B has a path of O(log k) nodes for propagating before the nodes get merged. Therefore
each cut labels at most O(k 5 log k) nodes. There are k + 1 different cuts, thus B has at most
O((k + 1)k 5 log k) = O(k 6 log k) nodes.

    Since the tableau variables were actually partial products of x and y, we can make this proof
smaller by branching on the bits of x, y to determine the tableau variables in a row, maintaining a
sliding window of ∆ bits of x, yielding:
Corollary 3.3. φStrip (k) has an O(k 5 log k)-size regular resolution refutation.
   We note that the alternative strategy of directly branching on the cuts to perform binary search
on the critical strip yields the same size bound as Corollary 3.3
Theorem 3.4. Let N = |φArray             2                  3
                            Comm | = O(n ). There is an O(N log N ) size regular resolution proof
that φComm is unsatisfiable. There is an O(N log N ) size ordered resolution proof that φArray
      Array                                 7/2
                                                                                          Comm is
unsatisfiable.
Proof. We can now describe the overall branching program B for φArray
                                                                   Comm (n). The branching program
branches on the inequality-constraint assignments σe (k) = {ek = 1, ek−1 = 0, . . . e0 = 0} for
k ∈ [0, 2n−1]. The k-th branch contains the clauses φStrip (k) so we can use the read-once branching
program from either Corollary 3.3 or Lemma 3.2 (with each node augmented with the assignment
σe (k)) to show that the branch is unsatisfiable. Corollary 3.3 yields the regular resolution proof
and Lemma 3.2 yields the ordered resolution proof.

3.4   Proofs of Array Multiplier Distributivity
Definition We define a SAT instance φArray Dist (n) to verify the distributivity property x(y + z) =
xy + xz for an array multiplier in the natural way. For the left hand expression we construct a
ripple-carry adder Ly+z , outputting o(y+z) , and array multiplier Lx(y+z) outputting ox(y+z) . For
the right hand expression, we similarly define circuits Rxz , Rxy and Rxy+xz .
    We define L = Ly+z ∪ Lx(y+z) and R = Rxz ∪ Rxy ∪ Rxy+xz . We let E contain the usual
inequality constraints. The full distributivity instance is then φArray
                                                                  Dist (n) = L ∪ R ∪ E.


                                                     12
   We again divide the instance into critical strips, following the strategy previously used to refute
φArray
 Comm .

Definition Define the constant ∆ = log(2n). Let φStrip (k) contain the following constraints from
φArray
 Dist (n): first, the full ripple-carry adder circuit L
                                                             y+z . Second, include the constraints containing
                                 x(y+z) xy xz
one of the tableau variables ti,j      , ti,j , ti,j for i + j ∈ [k − ∆, k]. Third, include the ripple-carry
adder constraints on the carry-bits and sum-bits cxy+xz       i     , oxy+xz
                                                                       i     for i ∈ [k − ∆, k]. Lastly, add
constraints to φStrip (k) that assign: ek = 1, ek−1 = 0, . . . , e0 = 0.

Lemma 3.5. φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable for all k

Proof. Like the proof of Lemma 3.1, the critical strip for Lx(y+z) holds tableau bits with the same
weighted sum (modulo 2k+1 ) as those in Rxz and Rxy combined. The critical strip for Lx(y+z) has
at most n input carry-bits of weight 2k−∆ . The critical strips of the n-bit multipliers Rxz and Rxy
each have at most n − 1 input carry variables of weight 2k−∆ . The critical strip of the adder Rxy+xz
has one input carry variable, so the critical strip for R has 2n − 1 input carry-bits. Since we set
the width of the strip at ∆ = log(2n), it is unsatisfiable.

Lemma 3.6. For each k there is an O(n5 log n) size regular resolution proof that φStrip (k) is
unsatisfiable.

Proof. We construct a labeled branching program B that solves the conflict clause search problem
for φStrip (k). We branch row-by-row in the critical strips, maintaining an assignment to cuts of
variables in each multiplier. For each strip we will select a (different) variable ordering for x, y, z
that reveals the tableau variables row-by-row. Assume that k < n for simplicity; the case where
k ≥ n is similar.
    For an array multiplier computing an expression C ∈ {x(y + z), xz, xy} and j ∈ [1, k − ∆] we
define CutC (j) to be the set of variables

                                   dC
                                    i,j−1        for i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k],

and for j ∈ [k − ∆ + 1, k] we define CutC (j) as the set of variables

                                   dC
                                    i,j−1        for i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k],
                                      oC
                                       i         for i ∈ [k − ∆, j − 2]

We define Cuty+z (j) as the singleton set {cy+z                 x
                                            j−1 } and define Cut (j) as the set

                                      xi     :     i ∈ [k − j − ∆, k − j].

. We also refer to a global cut, across the whole circuit: Cut(j) = ∪C CutC (j).

Initialization: Getting to Cut(1)           At the root node (∅, ∅) of B, we branch on the circuit input
variables y0 , z0 and
                                            xi     for i ∈ [k − ∆, k].




                                                         13
 Figure 9: The critical strip φStrip (4) for distributivity. Cut(2) consists of the enlarged variables.

We propagate these assignments to variables cy+z0 and oy+z
                                                       0 , giving us an assignment to Cut
                                                                                          y+z
                                                                                              (0).
                     y+z
The assignment to o0 , in turn, propagates to an assignment to the first row of tableau and sum
variables from the critical strip for Lx(y+z) :
                                  x(y+z)      x(y+z)
                                 ti,0      , di,0         for i ∈ [k − ∆, k].

At this point we have an assignment to Cutx(y+z) (0).
   We then propagate the input variable assignments through the multipliers Rxy and Rxz :
                                        txy     xy
                                         i,0 , di,0   :   i ∈ [k − ∆, k],
                                        txz     xz
                                         i,0 , di,0   :   i ∈ [k − ∆, k],
obtaining assignments to Cutxy (0) and Cutxz (0), thus completing an assignment to Cut(0). At this
point we merge nodes on assignment to Cut(0).

Inductive Step: Cut(j) to Cut(j + 1) Suppose we have merged branches and are at a node
labeled with an assignment to Cut(j). If this assignment contains a variable dC                     C
                                                                              0,i we propagate to oi .
                                                                                           y+z y+z
We branch on input variables xk−∆−j , yj , zj . We then propagate these assignments to cj+1    , oj+1 ,
followed by the next row of tableau, carry, and sum variables in each multiplier:
                         cC            C            C
                          i−j−2,j+1 , ti−j−1,j+1 , di−j−1,j+1      : i ∈ [k − ∆, k].
At this point we have reached an assignment to all of the variables in Cut(j + 1) so we merge nodes
based on Cut(j + 1). We repeat this step until reaching an assignment to Cut(k + 1), which consists
of each multiplier’s output bitvector oC .

End: Beyond Cut(k+1) Suppose that we have reached Cut(k+1) and merged nodes. We branch
on the input carry variable cxy+xz
                              k−∆−1 , that goes into the critical strip of ripple-carry adder R
                                                                                                xy+xz .

We can then propagate to the outputs oxy+xz . We now have an assignment to both ox(y+z) , oxy+xz
that was propagated from one assignment to the input variables to the critical strip. By Lemma 3.5,
this assignment conflicts with an inequality-constraint from E.

                                                          14
Size Bound: There are k + 1 different global cuts Cut(j). Each Cut(j) section of B begins with
an assignment to at most 4∆ + 1 variables. So each section Cut(j) is initialized with at most
24∆+1 = 8n4 branches. Each of these branches is a path with at most O(log n) queried variables
and therefore at most O(log n) nodes. So there are at most O(n4 log n) nodes per cut and therefore
at most O((k + 1)n4 log n) = O(n5 log n) nodes in B.

Theorem 3.7. There is an O(n6 log N ) size resolution proof that φArray
                                                                  Dist (k) is unsatisfiable.

Proof. At the root of this proof there are 2n branches each holding an assignment to ek , . . . , e1 , e0 .
We refute each branch using the O(n5 log n) size proof from Lemma 3.6.

3.5    Proofs of x(x + 1) = x2 + x for Array Multipliers
Definition We define a SAT instance φArray
                                     x(x+1) (n). Circuit L is composed of circuits L
                                                                                    x+1 , consisting

of a ripple-carry adder taking inputs x and 1 and outputting their sum (x + 1), and Lx(x+1) , an
                                                                                                  2
array multiplier outputting the product x(x + 1). Similarly, circuit R is composed of circuits Rx
        2
and Rx +x .
    We let E contain the usual inequality-constraints. The instance is then
                                                 φArray
                                                  x(x+1) (n) = L ∪ R ∪ E.

    While this identity looks like a special case of distributivity, its resolution proof is more com-
plicated. This is because for distributivity: x(y + z) = xy + xz, the inputs to each multiplier
were separate variables. This allowed us to scan the critical strip from one end to the other in a
read-once fashion. If we try a similar strategy to scan the critical strip for the multiplier Rx2 from
top to bottom, we will read each xi twice. To avoid reading the same variable twice, we instead
scan the critical strip from both ends, meeting in the middle.

Definition Define the constant ∆ = log(2n − 1). Let φStrip (k) contain the full ripple-carry adder
circuit Lx+1 from φArray
                   x(x+1) (n). Also include the constraints containing one of the multiplier tableau
           x(x+1)      2
variables ti,j      , txi,j for i + j ∈ [k − ∆, k]. Further include the constraints on the ripple-carry adder
                               2        2
carry-bits and sum-bits cxi +x , dxi +x for i ∈ [k − ∆, k]. Lastly, add constraints to φStrip (k) that
encode the values of the bits: ek = 1, ek−1 = 0, . . . , e0 = 0.
    We refer to the subcircuit φStrip (k) ∩ C as the critical strip for C. Figure 10 shows an example
of a critical strip.

Lemma 3.8. φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable for all k
Proof. The proof is the same as the proof for Lemma 3.5.

Definition For an array multiplier computing the expression C ∈ {x(x + 1), x2 } and j ∈ [1, (k −
∆)/2] we define CutC (j) to be the set of variables
                              dC
                               i,j−1     : i + j − 1 ∈ [k − ∆, k],       (upper cut)

                               cC        C
                                j−1,i , dj,i      : i + j ∈ [k − ∆, k]. (lower cut)
We define Cutx+1 (j) to contain xj−1 and the set of variables
                                            xi     : i ∈ [k − j − ∆, k − j].

                                                            15
Figure 10: The critical strip φStrip (5) for checking x(x+1) = x2 +x. The shaded region is satisfiable.
The enlarged variables belong to Cut(1).

Theorem 3.9. There is a size n7 log n regular resolution proof that φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable.
Proof. Initialization. We give our proof in the form of a labeled read-once branching program B.
                                                                            2
We begin by branching on a guess for the critical strip outputs ox(x+1) , ox +x . For the branches
that don’t conflict with an inequality-constraint, we branch on the values
                                          2
                                        oxi , xi   : i ∈ [k − ∆, k],
                                              2
then merge to erase the assignment to ox +x .
   We observe that the carry variables in Lx+1 must be a sequence of 1s followed by 0s. If, on the
contrary, we observe the assignments ci = 0 and cj = 1 for i < j, then we can efficiently find a
conflict by propagating ci = 0 through columns [i, j]. So we can begin this proof by branching on
the at most n valid carry-bit assignments
                           cx+1
                            0   = 1, . . . , cx+1
                                              i   = 1, cx+1               x+1
                                                        i+1 = 0, . . . , ck   = 0.
    Our branch order begins on the input variables x0 and xk , xk−1 , . . . , xk−∆ . We propagate the
resulting assignment to the upper and lower cuts in each circuit, then merge on the assignment to
Cut(1).

Inductive Step To get from Cut(j) to Cut(j + 1), we branch on input variables xj , xk−j−∆+1 ,
then propagate to and merge on Cut(j + 1).
    We have two cases: the upper and lower cuts of Cut(j + 1) either intersect or they do not. In
either case we branch on input variables xj−1 , xk−∆−j+1 and the input carry variables to rows j
and (k − j − ∆ + 1). If the cuts do not intersect, we propagate to, then merge on, all the Cut(j + 1)
variables. Otherwise, suppose that the upper and lower cuts of Cut(j + 1) intersect on di,j . The
upper and lower cuts of Cut(j) either propagate to conflicting values of di,j , in which case we have
found a conflict, or they agree on the value of di,j , in which case we delete column i + j from our
cuts.

                                                     16
Size Bound Each cut belongs to one of up to n branches for the carry variables in Lx+1 and
holds an assignment to at most 7 log n variables so there are at most n8 initial nodes for each cut.
Each of these nodes propagates for O(log n) steps to get to the next cut, so our branching program
has size O(n9 log n).

    We can now obtain a refutation for φArray
                                           x(x+1) (n) by branching on sequences of variables in e and
using the refutation for φStrip (k) on each branch.
Theorem 3.10. There is a size n10 log n regular resolution proof that the SAT instance φArray
                                                                                        x(x+1) (n)
is unsatisfiable.

3.6   Degree Two Identity Proofs for Array Multipliers
Let φArray
     L=R (n) denote a SAT instance checking that the array multiplier obeys the ring identity
L = R. With the insight from the earlier proofs in this section, we can prove the general theorem:
Theorem 3.11. For any degree two ring identity L = R, there are polynomial size regular refuta-
tions for φArray
           L=R (n).

Proof. (Sketch) We divide φArray
                               L=R (n) into unsatisfiable critical strips of width ∆ = log mn, where
m is the number of terms in the identity L = R. The ripple-carry adders that input to a multiplier
remain intact, and for the rest we remove the columns outside the critical strip.
    We begin by branching on guesses for the ∆ output bits from each multiplier and each truncated
ripple-carry adder. In each multiplier we use a ”meet-in-the-middle” strategy, similar to the proof
for x(x + 1) = x2 + x. We read all the input bitvectors in parallel, each in the same order. This
branch order for each input bitvector x is x0 , xn , x1 , xn−1 , . . .. We branch on the input carry-bits
as needed to propagate the cuts. We can propagate the resulting input variable assignments to
diagonal cuts in each multiplier that scan from the top and bottom edges towards the middle, and
likewise for the intact ripple-carry adders. In each input bitvector we remember the assignment to
just the most recently queried 2∆ variables. Because of the symmetry of this variable order, it is
compatible with swapping the order of inputs to any multiplier, as well as multipliers squaring an
input.


4     Diagonal Multipliers and Booth Multipliers
A diagonal multiplier uses a similar idea to the array multiplier. The difference is that the diagonal
multiplier routes its carry bits to the next row instead of the same row as depicted in Figure 7.
    A Booth multiplier uses a similar idea to the array multiplier, but uses two’s complement
notation and a telescoping sum identity to skip consecutive digits in one multiplicand. To add the
terms of this sum, the Booth multiplier uses a grid of full adders similarly to the array multiplier,
but with some small modifications to accommodate signed integers.
    Like with the array multiplier, we can divide the diagonal and Booth multipliers into O(log n)-
width unsatisfiable critical strips. Using the same input variable orderings from Section 3 we can
verify each of these critical strips with a polynomial-size regular resolution proof.

Definition Let φDiag
                  L=R (n) denote the SAT instance checking that an n-bit diagonal multiplier obeys
the ring identity L = R. Likewise let φBooth
                                         L=R (n) denote the SAT instance checking that an n-bit
Booth multiplier obeys the ring identity L = R

                                                   17
                             Figure 11: 8-bit, two-layer CLA adding x, y.


Theorem 4.1. For any degree two ring identity L = R, there are polynomial size regular resolution
proofs for φDiag         Booth
            L=R (n) and φL=R (n)

Proof. (Sketch) We divide φDiag             Booth
                               L=R (n) or φL=R (n) into unsatisfiable critical strips of width ∆ =
log mn, where m is the number of terms in the identity L = R. This is the same width as in the
array multiplier since the number of input carry-bits in each multiplier’s critical strip is at most
n. The ripple-carry adders that input to a multiplier remain intact, and for the rest we remove
the columns outside the critical strip. We note that although the Booth multiplier uses two’s
complement signed integers, this does not materially affect our critical strip proofs.
    We begin by branching on guesses for the ∆ output bits from each multiplier and each truncated
ripple-carry adder. We use the same branch order as in the array multiplier proof: each input
bitvector x is read in parallel, in the order x0 , xn , x1 , xn−1 , . . .. We branch on the input carry-bits
as needed to propagate the cuts. We can propagate the input variable assignments to diagonal
cuts in each multiplier that scan from the top and bottom edges towards the middle, and likewise
for the intact ripple-carry adders. In each input bitvector we remember the assignment to just the
most recently queried 2∆ variables.


5     Wallace Tree Multipliers
5.1    Wallace Tree Multiplier Construction
A Wallace tree multiplier takes a different approach to summing the tableau. Using carry-save
adders (parallel 1-bit adders), it iteratively finds a new tableau with the same weighted sum as the
previous tableau, but with 1/3 fewer rows. Upon reducing the original tableau to just two rows,
it uses a carry-lookahead adder to obtain the final result. In contrast to the array multiplier, a
Wallace tree multiplier is complicated to lay out physically, but has only logarithmic depth.

Carry-Lookahead Adder: A carry-lookahead adder (CLA) uses a tree structure to add two
bitvectors x, y with only logarithmic depth. The 4-bit CLA computes, for each pair xi , yi , the
values
                                    gi = xi yi pi = xi ⊕ yi .
Then, writing ci for the carry bit in the i-th column, we have

                                            ci+1 = gi ⊕ (pi ci ).

                                                     18
We can use this to derive the following equations, which we can use to compute each carry digit in
parallel from the values gi , pi and c0 :

                          c1 = g0 ⊕ p0 c0
                          c2 = g1 ⊕ g0 p1 ⊕ c0 p0,0 p1
                          c3 = g2 ⊕ g1 p2 ⊕ g0 p1 p2 ⊕ c0 p0 p1 p2
                          c4 = g3 ⊕ g2 p3 ⊕ g1 p2 p3 ⊕ g0 p1 p2 p3 ⊕ c0 p0 p1 p2 p3 .

These values are used to compute the outputs: oi = ci ⊕ xi ⊕ yi . It additionally computes the group
propagate and group generate:

                                 p1,4 = p3 p2 p1 p0
                                 g1,4 = g3 ⊕ g2 p3 ⊕ g1 p3 p2 ⊕ g0 p3 p2 p1 ,

where the first index indicates the layer.
    We construct a 16-bit CLA with 2 layers, whose first half of is shown in Figure 11. At the
zero-th layer we arrange four 4-bit CLAs, the k-th CLA taking inputs xi , yi , i ∈ [4k, 4k + 3] and
outputting to p0,i , g0,i , i ∈ [4k, 4k +3], where the superscript indicates the layer. We denote the k-th
CLA group propagate and generate by p1,4k g1,4k . Then the carries c4 , c8 , c12 , . . . can be computed
by the equations

            c4 = g1,0 ⊕ p1,0 c0
            c8 = g1,4 ⊕ g1,0 p1,4 ⊕ c0 p1,0 p1,4
           c12 = g1,8 ⊕ g1,4 p1,8 ⊕ g1,0 p1,4 p1,8 ⊕ c0 p1,0 p1.4 p1,8
           c16 = g1,12 ⊕ g1,8 p1,12 ⊕ g1,4 p1,8 p1,12 ⊕ p1,0 p1,4 p1,8 p1,12 ⊕ c0 p1,0 p1,4 p1,8 p1,12 .


Notice that these equations are isomorphic to the previous equations for computing carries within
each 4-bit CLA. We can reuse the same circuitry from the 4-bit CLA to compute these carries, as
well as the group propagate and generate for the next layer. We can repeat this process to construct
larger CLAs, with each iteration able to handle four times the bitwidth.

Wallace Tree Multiplier: We construct a Wallace tree multiplier taking input (x, y). We
compute a tableau of partial products like in the array multiplier. We then go through h ≈ log n
steps to reduce the n-row starting tableau to an equivalent 2-row tableau.
    We define tableau variables t`,i,j where ` is the layer of the tableau, i is the index of the column
containing the adder and j is the row. We will denote the set of tableau variables in a column by

                                       Col(i) = {t`,i,j      for all     `, j},

and call the subset of a column within a layer l a subcolumn, denoted by

                                       Col(`, i) = {t`,i,j     for all     j}.

In the zero-th layer, the tableau variables represent the partial products:

                                       t0,i,j = xi−j ∧ yj      for i < n,

                                                        19
Figure 12: Dot diagram for a 9 × 9 Wallace tree multiplier. Hollow dots represent carry-bits and
solid dots represent sum-bits. Dots connected by an edge are output by the same adder.


                                   t0,i,j = xn−1−j ∧ yi−n+j+1      for i ≥ n.
We now specify how to construct layer ` + 1 from layer `. We partition the rows of layer ` into
sets of three, from top to bottom. Adder A`,i,j will take input from the i-th column of the j-th set
of three rows. For each row of adders j = 0, 1, . . ., for each i ∈ [0, 2n], we append adder A`,i,j ’s
sum-bit to subcolumn Col(`+1, i). Then for each i, we append adder A`,i,j ’s carry-bit to subcolumn
Col(` + 1, i + 1).
    Each layer reduces the number of rows in the tableau from N to d2N/3e. The tableau for the
last layer h < log3/2 (n) < 2 log n, will only have two rows. We use a 2n-bit2 carry-lookahead adder
(CLA) to sum the two rows in logarithmic depth, outputting the final sum in the output bits oi .
    Like the proofs for array multipliers, our proofs for Wallace tree multipliers divide the instance
into critical strips. In fact, our proofs branch on the input tableau in the same row-by-row order
  2
      This is not a (2n − 1)-bit adder because the top summand may have 2n bits.


                                                        20
in both array and Wallace tree multipliers. However the size of the resulting cuts is O(log2 n)
for Wallace tree multipliers rather than the O(log n) size cuts for array multipliers. This cut size
results in quasipolynomial size regular resolution proofs.
    When analyzing the cuts in a Wallace tree multiplier, we will find the following property useful:

Definition For layer ` of a Wallace tree multiplier, if for each j ≤ k, the outputs of j-th row of
adders, {A`,i,j }i , map to and cover the rows 2j, 2j + 1 of the next layer ` + 1’s tableau, we say that
layer ` is row-friendly up to its k-th row of adders. If layer ` is row-friendly up to its last row of
adders, we say that layer ` is row-friendly.

Lemma 5.1. In a Wallace tree multiplier, each layer ` ∈ [0, h − 2] is row-friendly.

   In terms of the dot diagram in Figure 12, this Lemma simply states that no two bits are
connected with a line of slope greater than one.

5.2   Proofs of Wallace Tree Multiplier Commutativity
Definition We define a SAT instance φWallComm (n). The inputs to the multipliers are n-bit integers
x, y. Using the construction from Section 5, we define Wallace tree multipliers L, computing xy,
and R, computing yx (reversing the order of multiplier inputs).
    After specifying the circuits L and R, we add a circuit E, of of inequality-constraints encoding
that the two circuits disagree on some output bit.

Definition Define δ = log(n + 2). Let φStrip (k) contain the constraints from φWall          Comm (n) that
                                 xy      yx
contain a tableau variable t`,i,j or t`,i,j for i ∈ [k − δ, k], and also the constraints for the full CLAs
at the end of the Wallace tree multipliers. Also add unit clauses to φStrip (k) for the assignment:
e0 = 0, e1 = 0, . . . , ek−1 = 0, ek = 1.
    We call the newly unconstrained tableau bits in column k − δ, that were carry-bits output by
adders from the removed column k − δ − 1, the input carry-bits to φStrip (k).

Lemma 5.2. φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable for all k.

Proof. We reason similarly to the proof of Lemma 3.1. Again, we interpret the critical strip as
a circuit that computes the weighted sum, in both L and R, of the tableau variables within the
strip. The assignment to e asserts that the outputs of L and R differ by precisely 2k . We bound
the admissible difference in outputs by counting the number of input carry-bits in either L or R.
Since each layer of a Wallace tree multiplier has d2/3e fewer rows than the previous layer, the
total number of tableau rows past the initial layer is at most 2n. At most half of these rows are
composed of carry-bits, so circuits L and R each have at most n input carry-bits coming from the
removed column k − δ − 1. Additionally, the newly unconstrained inputs to the final CLA from the
removed columns can contribute a total weight of at most 2k−δ to the final output. Since we set
δ = log(n + 2), the total difference between the final outputs is at most 2k−δ (n + 2) < 2k .
                                                               2
Lemma 5.3. There is a regular resolution proof of size 28 log n+O(log n) that φStrip (k) is unsatisfiable.

Proof. The idea of this proof is to read the initial layer of the critical strip row-by-row. If we have
assigned all of the inputs to a row of adders, we propagate to their output bits. In this way, an
input assignment to x and y will propagate through the layers of the Wallace tree multiplier in

                                                   21
parallel, then finally reach an assignment to the output bits of both circuits. From the proof of 5.2,
the result will contradict one of the inequality-constraints from φWall
                                                                    Comm (n).
    Each node of the branching program will only keep track of a constant number of variables in
each subcolumn. This will ensure that the cuts have O(log2 n) variables, so that the branching
                             2
program has at most 2O(log n) nodes.
    We first preprocess the constraints to obtain the equalities txy         yx
                                                                    0,i,j = t0,i,i−j . Like in the array
multiplier case, as we branch from the top tableau row downwards in circuit L, we will reveal the
bottom row upwards in circuit R. We will first describe how the branching program B propagates an
assignment from the initial tableau to an assignment to the last layer in circuit L. The propagation
in circuit R works symmetrically, going from the bottom row of adders to the top in each layer.
Then we will describe how to propagate an assignment to the last layer through the CLA to finally
reach an assignment to the output bits.


     Algorithm 1 Propagates from the initial layer ` = 0 to the final layer ` = h of the
     critical strip L while assigning at most a constant number of bits per subcolumn.
      1: for j = 0, 1, . . . , dn/3e do
      2:    Branch on the inputs to the j-th row of adders {Axy      0,i,j }i .
      3:    for each layer ` = 0, 1, . . . , h − 1 before the last layer do
      4:       if layer ` has a fully assigned row of adders {Axy    `,i,j 0 }i then
      5:                                             0   0
                   Propagate to tableau rows 2j , 2j + 1 of layer ` + 1.
      6:           Merge to forget the assignment to the row of adders {Axy          `,i,j 0 }i .
      7:           Branch on any input carry-bits in tableau rows 2j 0 , 2j 0 + 1 of layer ` + 1.
      8:       end if
      9:    end for
     10: end for

    The branching program B begins by following the Algorithm 0 on circuit L. We use the
propagation loop in lines 3-9 for circuit R, leaving the branching steps to circuit L. We claim that
at the end, B will reach an assignment to just the last layer of circuits L and R. This will follow
immediately from Lemma 5.4.
Lemma 5.4. During the execution of Algorithm 0, the tableau variables within each layer of circuit
L get assigned in row order from top to bottom. Furthermore, each tableau variable eventually
receives an assignment.
    Likewise, the tableau variables in each layer ` > 0 of circuit R get assigned in row order from
bottom to top, and each tableau variable eventually receives an assignment.

Proof. We prove both properties in circuit L by induction, making use of the row-friendliness of
Wallace tree multipliers from Lemma 5.1. It is clear that the initial layer satisfies both properties.
Suppose that layer ` − 1 satisfies both properties. Then its rows of adders {Axy    `−1,i,j 0 }i get assigned
to in ascending order with j 0 = 0, 1, . . .. For each increment of j 0 , by row friendliness the steps 5
and 7 yield an assignment to all the variables in tableau rows 2j 0 , 2j 0 + 1 of layer `. So layer ` gets
assigned in row order from top to bottom, and each tableau variable in ` eventually receives an
assignment.




                                                     22
Figure 13: An intermediate state in the CLA after scanning up to the sixth column. The box
contains the columns of the critical strip. The blue variables are assigned while the blank variables
were previously assigned, but then erased. Notice that we remember the assignment to the output
variables in the strip and forgot the assignment outside.


    The proof for circuit R is symmetric, except the initial tableau is not assigned in horizontal
rows, but rather diagonal rows. Nevertheless, the subsequent layer ` = 1 will still satisfy both
desired properties and the induction argument may be used from there.

Corollary 5.5. At the end of Algorithm 0, the branching program B reaches an assignment to
precisely both rows in the last layer of circuits L and R.
   To propagate an assignment to last layer of L or R through the CLA, we will follow Algorithm 0.
This algorithm will essentially perform a a post-order traversal of the full CLA tree. While it is
not technically necessary to include the components of the CLA to the right of the critical strip,
we have retained them for clarity.


     Algorithm 2 Propagates from the inputs to the critical strip outputs of the CLA while
     assigning at most a constant number of bits per CLA layer.
      1: for i = 0, 1, . . . , 2n do
      2:     Branch on any unassigned inputs to the i-th column: th,i,0 , th,i,1 .
      3:     while there is a pair of propagate and generate variables p`,i0 , g`,i0 with all their
         input variables assigned. do
      4:        Propagate to p`,i0 , g`,i0 while merging to forget their input bits.
      5:        Merge to forget the carry-bits computed by the CLA that output p`,i0 , g`,i0 .
      6:        Propagate to each carry-bit with all its input variables assigned.
      7:        Propagate to each critical strip output bit with all its inputs assigned.
      8:     end while
      9: end for

   After running Algorithm 0 in both circuits L and R, we have an assignment to the outputs of
both critical strips. By Lemma 5.2, this assignment violates an inequality-constraint in E.

Size Bound: We claim that in the first phase, where the branching program B is executing
Algorithm 0, each node in B is labeled by an assignment to at most four rows of tableau variables
within each layer ` of L, and likewise for each layer ` > 1 for R. By Lemma 5.4, the tableau


                                                  23
variables within each layer are assigned in row order from top to bottom in L. So if four rows are
assigned in a layer `, they form a fully assigned row of adders {Axy
                                                                   0,i,j }i . Algorithm 0 will propagate
that assignment to the next layer, erasing the assignment to the row of adders {Axy    0,i,j }i . The same
proof works to show that at most four rows of tableau variables are assigned within each layer ` > 1
of R.
    Each node in the first phase of B then holds an assignment to at most 8δh variables of the
critical strip. Both L and R have at most 2n rows of tableau variables, so the number of tableau
variables in the critical strip is upper bounded by 4nh. Therefore the execution of Algorithm 0 will
take at most 4nh steps. As this algorithm is also oblivious, each node gets labeled by an assignment
to one of 4nh sets of at most 8δh tableau variables. So the total number of nodes in the first phase
                                   2
of B is at most 4nh2δh = 216 log n+O(log n) .
    We can obtain a more efficient version of Algorithm 0 by immediately propagating when an
individual adder becomes fully assigned. This modified algorithm will only store at most two
variables per subcolumn, except for a single ”working” subcolumn in each layer that may hold
                                                                    2
three variables. This modification results in a size bound of 28 log n+O(log n) .
    We give a polynomial bound for the second phase, where the branching program B is executing
Algorithm 0. Observe that this algorithm only keeps an assignment to variables within the sub-
CLAs intersecting the i-th column. At most one sub-CLA in each of the log4 n layers will intersect
the i-th column, so there are O(log n) assigned variables in any step of Algorithm 0. The whole
CLA has O(n) variables, therefore B uses a polynomial number of nodes to execute Algorithm 0.
                                                              2
    The total size of the branching program B is then 28 log n+O(log n) .
                                                                    2
Theorem 5.6. There is a regular resolution proof of size 28 log n+O(log n) that φWall
                                                                                 Comm (n) is unsat-
isfiable

Proof. As usual, we initially branch on the assignments σe (k) = {e0 = 0, e1 = 0, . . . ek = 1} for
k ∈ [0, 2n − 1]. The k-th branch contains the clauses φStrip (k) so we can use the Read-Once
branching program from Lemma 5.3 (with each node augmented with the assignment σe (k)) to
show that the branch is unsatisfiable.

5.3   Proofs of Wallace Tree Multiplier Distributivity
Our proof of commutativity for Wallace tree multipliers used Algorithms 0 and 0 to efficiently
propagate an assignment from the initial layer of L’s critical strip to the outputs. We will modify
the branching step in these algorithms to verify the distributivity of Wallace tree multipliers.

Definition Define a SAT instance φWall  Dist (n) encoding the identity x(y + z) = xy + xz in the
usual way, with subcircuits Ly+z , Lx(y+z) forming circuit L, Rxy , Rxz , Rxy+xz forming circuit R and
inequality-constraints E.
                                                                     2
Theorem 5.7. There is a regular resolution proof of size 2O(log n) that φWall
                                                                         Dist (n) is unsatisfiable

Proof. (Sketch) We sketch the proofs for distributivity as they are simpler than the proofs for
commutativity. The main difference is that we branch on the input variables x, y, z rather than
the tableau variables in the initial layer.
    We define critical strips in the usual way for each multiplier. There are at most n + 2 uncon-
strained carry bits in the n + 1-bit multiplier Lx(y+z) and one unconstrained carry bit from the


                                                   24
adder Ly+z for n + 3 total in L’s critical strip. Together, the two n-bit multipliers Rxy , Rxz have
2n + 2 unconstrained carry bits. The adder Rxy+xz contributes one more for a total of 2n + 3
unconstrained carry bits in R’s critical strip. So if our critical strip has width δ = log(2n + 4), it
will be unsatisfiable.
    We now describe a branching program B that proves a given critical strip φStrip (k) is unsatisfi-
able. We begin the branching program B by running Algorithm 0 with the following modification:
instead of branching on a row of initial tableau variables in some multiplier {t0,i,j }i , branching
program B will instead branch on the input variables x, y, z and propagate to that row of tableau
variables {t0,i,j }i . To reveal the rows from top to bottom in the initial layer of each multiplier’s
critical strip, we only need to assign a sliding window of δ bits in each input bitvector x, y, z. The
resulting branch order on x, y, z is the same as in our proof of array multiplier distributivity.
    At the end of Algorithm 0, the branching program B reaches an assignment to the last layer
of each multiplier Rxy , Rxz , Lx(y+z) . By using Algorithm 0, we propagate this assignment to the
multiplier outputs xy, xz and x(y + z). Lastly, we propagate from xy, xz, through the CLA
circuit Lxy+xz , to the final output xy + xz. Since the critical strip was unsatisfiable, the resulting
assignment to x(y + z) and xy + xz must violate some equality-constraint from E.

5.4   Degree Two Identity Proofs for Wallace Tree Multipliers
Using the same ordering on the input variables and ideas from the proof of Theorem 3.11, we can
prove the analogous result for Wallace tree multipliers.

Theorem 5.8. For any degree two ring identity L = R, there are quasipolynomial size regular
refutations for φWall
                 L=R (n).


6     Proving Equivalence Between Multipliers
Given any two n-bit multiplier circuits ⊗1 and ⊗2 we can define a Boolean formula φ⊗1 =⊗2 encoding
the negation of the identity x ⊗1 y = x ⊗2 y between length n bitvectors x and y.
    If both ⊗1 and ⊗2 are correct and compute using the typical tableau for multipliers then, as
before, we can split φ⊗1 =⊗2 into unsatisfiable critical strips. We can scan down both strips row-by-
row, as in the proofs for commutativity and distributivity. If we have reached the outputs of both
multipliers without finding an error, these outputs will disagree with the inequality-constraints for
the critical strip. For our examples this method yields polynomial-size proofs if neither is a Wallace
tree multiplier, and quasi-polynomial size proofs otherwise.
    On the other hand, if one multiplier is incorrect and the other is not, then the proof search will
yield a satisfying assignment in the appropriate critical strip.
    In the more general case where a multiplier does not use the typical tableau, one can label
each internal gate by the index of the smallest output bit to which it is connected and focus on
comparing subcircuits labeled by O(log n) consecutive output bits, as we do with critical strips.
The complexity of this equivalence checking will depend somewhat on the similarity of the circuits
involved.




                                                  25
7    Discussion
Despite significant advances in SAT solvers, one of their key persisting weaknesses has been in ver-
ifying arithmetic circuits containing multipliers. This pointed towards the conjecture that that the
corresponding resolution proofs are exponentially large; if true, this would have been a fundamental
obstacle putting nonlinear arithmetic out of reach for any CDCL SAT solver.
    Thus, much of the recent research on multiplier verification has focused on using algebraic
reasoning, in particular Groebner basis methods. The recent work of Ritirc, Biere, and Kauers [38,
39] has improved the Groebner basis approach by dividing a multiplier into columns, and then
incrementally checking that each column receives and transmits its carry-bits correctly. They find
that this incremental method allows off-the-shelf computer algebra software to verify ”simple”
multiplier designs of up to 64 bits, though ”optimized” multipliers still pose some difficulty.
    We have shown that the conjectured resolution proof size barrier does not hold by giving the first
small resolution proofs for verifying any degree two ring identity for the most common multiplier
designs. We introduced a method of dividing each instance into narrow, but still unsatisfiable,
critical strips that is sufficiently general to yield short proofs for a wide variety of popular multiplier
designs. In light of our results and [38, 39], it seems that for verifying multipliers at the bit-level,
the column-wise view is most natural. This is in contrast to the row-wise view taken, for example,
in verifying multipliers at the word level. We remark that the critical strip decomposition is not
only useful in the domain of resolution proofs. Other verification methods may find critical strips
a useful testing ground, or could even benefit from checking each strip instead of the full multiplier
all at once.
    Given the historical success of CDCL SAT solvers for finding specific proofs, our results suggest
a new path towards verifying nonlinear arithmetic. The proof size upper bounds we derived were
conservative; we did not try to optimize the parameters. Nevertheless, the observed scaling of SAT
solver performance on these problems suggests that they do not currently find proofs matching
even these upper bounds. An important direction for improving SAT solvers is to find the right
guiding information to add, either to the formulas derived from the circuits or to CDCL SAT solver
heuristics, to help them find shorter proofs.
    It also remains open to find a small resolution proof verifying the last ring property, associativity
(xy)z = x(yz). Our critical strip idea alone does not seem to work: while we can divide the outer
multipliers into narrow critical strips, the yz or xy multipliers remain intact. These critical strips
do not seem to have small cuts. Finding efficient proofs of associativity, combined with our results
for degree two identities, could yield small proofs of any general ring identity.


References
 [1] Michael Alekhnovich and Alexander A. Razborov. Satisfiability, branch-width and tseitin tau-
     tologies. In 43rd Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS 2002), Proceedings,
     pages 593–603, Vancouver, BC, Canada, November 2002. IEEE Computer Society.

 [2] Gunnar Andersson, Per Bjesse, Byron Cook, and Ziyad Hanna. A proof engine approach
     to solving combinational design automation problems. In Proceedings of the 39th Design
     Automation Conference, DAC 2002, pages 725–730, New Orleans, LA, USA, June 2002. ACM.




                                                    26
 [3] Fabrı́cio Vivas Andrade, Márcia C. M. Oliveira, Antônio Otávio Fernandes, and Claudionor
     José Nunes Coelho Jr. Sat-based equivalence checking based on circuit partitioning and special
     approaches for conflict clause reuse. In Patrick Girard, Andrzej Krasniewski, Elena Grama-
     tová, Adam Pawlak, and Tomasz Garbolino, editors, Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Workshop
     on Design & Diagnostics of Electronic Circuits & Systems (DDECS 2007), pages 397–402,
     Kraków, Poland, April 2007. IEEE Computer Society.

 [4] Paul Beame, Henry A. Kautz, and Ashish Sabharwal. Towards understanding and harnessing
     the potential of clause learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 22:319–351, 2004.

 [5] Armin Biere. Challenges in bit-precise reasoning. In Formal Methods in Computer-Aided
     Design, FMCAD 2014, page 3, Lausanne, Switzerland, October 2014.

 [6] Armin Biere. Where does SAT not work?          In BIRS Workshop on Theory and Ap-
     plications of Applied SAT Solving, January 2014. http://www.birs.ca/events/2014/5-day-
     workshops/14w5101/videos/watch/201401201634-Biere.html.

 [7] Armin Biere. Collection of Combinational Arithmetic Miters Submitted to the SAT Com-
     petition 2016. In Tomáš Balyo, Marijn Heule, and Matti Järvisalo, editors, Proc. of SAT
     Competition 2016 – Solver and Benchmark Descriptions, volume B-2016-1 of Department of
     Computer Science Series of Publications B, pages 65–66. University of Helsinki, 2016.

 [8] Armin Biere. Weaknesses of CDCL solvers. In Fields Institute Workshop on Theoretical
     Foundations of SAT Solving, August 2016. http://www.fields.utoronto.ca/talks/weaknesses-
     cdcl-solvers.

 [9] Beate Bollig. Larger lower bounds on the OBDD complexity of integer multiplication. Inf.
     Comput., 209(3):333–343, 2011.

[10] Beate Bollig and Philipp Wooelfel. A read-once branching program lower bound of Ω(2n/4 )
     for integer multiplication using universal hashing. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Annual
     ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 419–424, Hersonissos, Crete, Greece,
     July 2001.

[11] Raik Brinkmann and Rolf Drechsler. RTL-datapath verification using integer linear program-
     ming. In Proceedings of the ASPDAC 2002 / VLSI Design 2002, pages 741–746, Bangalore,
     India, January 2002.

[12] Robert Brummayer and Armin Biere. Boolector: An efficient SMT solver for bit-vectors
     and arrays. In Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 15th
     International Conference, TACAS 2009, pages 174–177, 2009.

[13] Roberto Bruttomesso, Alessandro Cimatti, Anders Franzén, Alberto Griggio, Ziyad Hanna,
     Alexander Nadel, Amit Palti, and Roberto Sebastiani. A lazy and layered SMT({BV}) solver
     for hard industrial verification problems. In Proceedings, Computer Aided Verification, 19th
     International Conference, CAV 2007, pages 547–560, Berlin, Germany, July 2007.

[14] Roberto Bruttomesso, Alessandro Cimatti, Anders Franzén, Alberto Griggio, and Roberto
     Sebastiani. The MathSAT 4SMT solver. In Proceedings, Computer Aided Verification, 20th
     International Conference, CAV 2008, pages 299–303, 2008.

                                                27
[15] Randal E. Bryant. Graph-based algorithms for boolean function manipulation. IEEE Trans.
     Computers, 35(8):677–691, 1986.

[16] Randal E. Bryant. On the complexity of vlsi implementations and graph representations of
     boolean functions with application to integer multiplication. IEEE Trans. Comput., 40(2):205–
     213, 1991.

[17] Jerry R. Burch, Edmund M. Clarke, David E. Long, Kenneth L. McMillan, and David L. Dill.
     Symbolic model checking for sequential circuit verification. IEEE Transactions on Computer-
     Aided Design of Integrated Circuits, 13(4):401–424, 1994.

[18] Samuel R. Buss and Maria Luisa Bonet. An improved separation of regular resolution from
     pool resolution and clause learning. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference
     on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT 2012), volume 7313 of Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, pages 244–57, Trento, Italy, June 2012.

[19] Samuel R. Buss, Jan Hoffmann, and Jan Johannsen. Resolution trees with lemmas: Resolu-
     tion refinements that characterize DLL algorithms with clause learning. Logical Methods in
     Computer Science, 4(4), 2008.

[20] Samuel R. Buss and Leszek Kolodziejczyk. Small stone in pool. Logical Methods in Computer
     Science, 10(2), 2014.

[21] Martin Davis, George Logemann, and Donald Loveland. A machine program for theorem-
     proving. Commun. ACM, 5(7):394–397, 1962.

[22] Martin Davis and Hilary Putnam. A computing procedure for quantification theory. Commu-
     nications of the ACM, 7:201–215, 1960.

[23] Leonardo Mendonça de Moura. System description: Yices 0.1. Technical report, Computer
     Science Laboratory, SRI International, 2005.

[24] Leonardo Mendonça de Moura and Nikolaj Bjørner. Z3: an efficient SMT solver. In Proceed-
     ings, Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems, 14th International
     Conference, TACAS 2008, pages 337–340, 2008.

[25] Rina Dechter. Bucket elimination: A unifying framework for probabilistic inference. In Eric
     Horvitz and Finn Verner Jensen, editors, UAI ’96: Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Con-
     ference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 211–219, Portland, OR, USA, August
     1996. Morgan Kaufmann.

[26] Vijay Ganesh and David L. Dill. A decision procedure for bit-vectors and arrays. In Proceed-
     ings, Computer Aided Verification, 19th International Conference, CAV 2007, pages 519–531,
     Berlin, Germany, July 2007.

[27] Edward Hirsch, Dmitry Itsykson, Arist Kojevnikov, Alexander Kulikov, and Sergey Nikolenko.
     Report on the mixed boolean-algebraic solver. Technical report, Laboratory of Mathematical
     Logic of St. Petersburg Department of Steklov Institute of Mathematics, 2005.




                                               28
[28] Priyank Kalla. Formal verification of arithmetic datapaths using algebraic geometry and
     symbolic computation. In Proceedings, Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design, FMCAD,
     page 2, Austin, TX, September 2015.
[29] Gergely Kovásznai, Andreas Fröhlich, and Armin Biere. Complexity of fixed-size bit-vector
     logics. Theory Comput. Syst., 59(2):323–376, 2016.
[30] Jan Krajı́ček. Bounded Arithmetic, Propositional Logic and Complexity Theory. Cambridge
     University Press, 1996.
[31] Daniel Kroening and Ofer Strichman. Decision Procedures: An Algorithmic Point of View.
     Springer, 2008.
[32] László Lovász, Moni Naor, Ilan Newman, and Avi Wigderson. Search problems in the decision
     tree model. In SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, volume 107, pages 119–132, 1995.
[33] João P. Marques-Silva, Ines Lynce, and Sharad Malik. CDCL solvers. In Armin Biere, Marijn
     Heule, Hans van Maaren, and Toby Walsh, editors, Handbook of Satisfiability, chapter 4, pages
     131–154. IOS Press, 2009.
[34] Openssl.org. Openssl bug cve-2016-7055, 2016.
[35] Ganapathy Parthasarathy, Madhu K. Iyer, Kwang-Ting Cheng, and Li-C. Wang. An efficient
     finite-domain constraint solver for circuits. In Proceedings of the 41th Design Automation
     Conference, DAC, pages 212–217, 2004.
[36] Stephen Ponzio. A lower bound for integer multiplication with read-once branching programs.
     In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing,
     pages 130–139, Las Vegas, NV, May 1995.
[37] Sherief Reda and A. Salem. Combinational equivalence checking using boolean satisfiability
     and binary decision diagrams. In Wolfgang Nebel and Ahmed Jerraya, editors, Proceedings
     of the Conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe, DATE 2001, pages 122–126,
     Munich, Germany, March 2001. IEEE Computer Society.
[38] Daniela Ritirc, Armin Biere, and Manuel Kauers. Column-wise verification of multipliers using
     computer algebra. In FMCAD, pages 23–30, 2017.
[39] Daniela Ritirc, Armin Biere, and Manuel Kauers. Improving and extending the algebraic
     approach for verifying gate-level multipliers. In 2018 Design, Automation & Test in Europe
     Conference, DATE 2018, pages 1556–1561, Dresden, Germany, March 2018.
[40] Martin Sauerhoff and Philipp Woelfel. Time-space tradeoff lower bounds for integer multi-
     plication and graphs of arithmetic functions. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Annual ACM
     Symposium on the Theory of Computing, pages 186–195, San Diega, CA, June 2003.
[41] Amr A. R. Sayed-Ahmed, Daniel Große, Ulrich Kühne, Mathias Soeken, and Rolf Drechsler.
     Formal verification of integer multipliers by combining gröbner basis with logic reduction. In
     Luca Fanucci and Jürgen Teich, editors, 2016 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference
     & Exhibition, DATE 2016, pages 1048–1053, Dresden, Germany, March 2016. IEEE.


                                                29
